[inaudible]
a priest,
a rabbi in a comedian walk into a youtube studio that was once a garage.
Bishop Robert Barron,
Rabbi David Wolpe.
Good to have you guys here.
Good to be here.
I'm very happy to be doing this because we are smack in between Hanukkah and
Christmas.
So it seemed like the right time to get you two together and I had you both on
the show individually and enjoyed the very much and I thought let's have a,
let's have a conversation about religion and meeting and good social media and
all sorts of other things.
So first,
um,
I thought we just talk a little bit about the way that people are talking about
religion these days.
I know that you both saw at least a portion of my chat from a couple of weeks
ago with Jordan Peterson and Ben Shapiro.
Uh,
Ben is obviously Orthodox Jew.
Jordan comes through things through a Christian perspective.
Um,
the idea though that people,
that the average people out there aren't necessarily getting the messages that
you guys talk about in the traditional way and that they're getting them in
through youtube videos and podcasts and things like that.
W W what do you make of that?
You know,
I'm pretty good with it actually.
I think it's a sign of our time and it's the way people communicate.
And so those two gentlemen have found a way,
you know,
cause you have to use the social media very creatively and if they can
communicate some of the truth of religion,
why not?
And also I think with especially Jordan Peterson in mind,
it's a smart presentation of religious themes and speaking on my own tradition,
you know,
after Vatican two we kind of dumb things down,
which I think has been a pastoral disaster actually.
And one reason we've lost why young people,
we presented Catholicism of very flat secularized,
unintelligent way.
And Jordan Peterson is presenting,
you know,
at least a version of religion,
a version of,
of biblical interpretation in a very compelling,
very intelligent way.
And look how young people are responding to it.
Like mad.
I think that's a very hopeful sign.
Yeah.
What do you think?
I think that the twist is that,
you know,
we were talking right before the show started about people that have debated and
the Harrises to some extent,
but much more the Hitchens of blessed memory,
um,
and,
and others would take,
would take religion,
Richard Dawkins and say it is this collection of ridiculous dogmas and,
and nothing worthwhile and anything that is worthwhile in it,
we have in the second the world better.
And the counter argument used to be,
well,
you don't necessarily have to buy all of religion to realize that the themes are
deep and complicated and inspiring and beautiful.
And I think that they're being framed to that way.
I mean,
I don't know.
I'm not sure.
You know,
I'm not sure he knows what exactly Peterson's religious commitment is.
But one thing that is clear is that he and many of the people who listened to
him and follow him take religious themes,
ideas,
and sometimes even scriptural stories as indicative of something deeper about
the nature of the world.
Do you think that's enough?
I mean,
as I'm out for one enough for,
for just a human,
not just someone that's publicly talking about this,
but is that rich enough to just take the songs and the stories without perhaps
some of the mighty,
my principle concern as somebody who's associated with institutional religion,
which is like anathema to many people is when someone tells me for example that
they are spiritual but not religious.
What I always want to say to them is how much do you give to charity?
Because to have your own life enriched,
but for it not to be expressed in conduct is not enough.
So the question that I would always have is in what way does it influence the
way you treat other human beings?
How charitable you are,
whether you are part of a community and you both take from that community but
also contribute to it.
If it does all of those things,
then I'm much more persuaded that it's effective.
If all it does is get you to attend the lecture,
read a book,
and feel like you've been elevated,
then it's not enough.
Yeah,
I suspect you probably agree with the premise there.
Yeah.
It's not enough.
I mean,
I think it's a good starting point.
Uh,
to me what Jordan Peterson does with the Bible is similar to what the church
fathers in our tradition quoted call the moral sense of,
of the scripture.
So you look at the Bible a number of ways and one is to uncover it's,
it's important for moral behavior.
We might say today for our psychology,
you know,
good,
wonderful.
But then there's a lot of other dimensions to read the Bible.
The Bible makes certain objective claims about God and it tastes the New
Testament about Jesus,
about eternal life.
You know,
and I think that's not touched on so much by Jordan Peterson.
Now again,
I don't want to bad mouth.
I think it's a very good starting point for a lot of people.
It's a way in,
why not begin with the moral psychological sense.
But then I'd say,
keep going.
You know?
And finally you do have to make metaphysical claims.
It seems to me in in the religious realm,
you can't simply leave it at the level of subjective appropriation.
You have to say,
is it true that God exists?
Is it true that God's the creator of all things?
And in the case of Christianity,
is it true that the God sent his only son that we might have life in his name?
So you have to wrestle with those metaphysical issues.
But I'm flying with him as a,
as a opening of a door,
you know?
So it's so interesting to me that people actually care about a debate about the
nature of truth.
You know,
it's like we live in a time when everyone's on Twitter all day,
where we can be distracted by video games and a kajillion other things.
And yet somehow through that,
you know,
that video that we did has over a million views already in a couple hundred
thousand on the,
on the audio podcast.
And it's a two hour conversation about these things.
So one of the things that we really focused on was the sort of,
what I think they would both argue are the bedrock values of the Judeo Christian
society.
So when someone says that to you,
since I have someone from the Judeo Christian part here,
what does that actually mean to you?
When someone says the values of the Judeo Christian society?
I think deep respect for the dignity of the,
of the individual made in the image of likeness of God,
the
call to justice,
the culture piece,
the cult to nonviolence,
the call to love the call of compassion and see all that is the great trajectory
of the biblical revelation.
You know,
those are the behavioral implications of the more profound metaphysical claims.
But I'd see all that we have very much in common.
Anyone in a biblical frame of mind,
we'd see those things.
Yeah,
I completely agree.
And I think that the implication of the second half of what the Bishop was
saying is that there is,
and this is one of the reasons I think why,
why Ben and Jordan communicate so effectively as they agree about this,
that truth is not actually the truth is a objective concept that exists as
opposed to something that's entirely the invention of human beings in a relative
sense.
And depending on time and place.
And that doesn't mean that you have easy access to it.
And you may never in fact understand it,
but even the statement that there is such a thing as a truth is in our time
somewhat countercultural.
So one of the things that we talked about was,
this has been argued by many people,
but Jordan in that conversation was talking about it.
That there's a sense right now that all the good ideas of the world of freedom
and the individual and all of those things came from the enlightenment and
enlightenment guy who can go into my room over there,
every book that's from an enlightenment thinkers.
Some of these books right here are,
um,
but as a guy who's debated,
some of the people that have written some of these books that have been in this
room,
I suspect you would argue that,
that the enlightenment values alone,
which I suppose you hold many of sure weren't,
weren't enough.
Right?
Is that
fair?
I would say first of all,
they have more religious roots then the radical enlightenment theorists admit
to.
Yeah.
Can,
can you explain that a little bit?
Sure.
I mean,
when you talk about,
for example,
the dignity of the individual,
which is very much an enlightenment,
I did well the first statement about human nature and the Bible is that a human
being's created in the image of God.
So,
I mean,
I hate to say for every good I,
oh,
we had at first,
but we clearly have that first.
Um,
we being,
you know,
anybody who associate themselves with this tradition,
and also by the way,
to be fair,
you know,
I've traveled in the east,
you find many of these ideas in places where the enlightenment never took hold.
So to,
to argue like Jonathan Israel does,
who's at an enlightenment historian,
that these are all legacies of the enlightenment.
Well,
what about India?
What about,
you know,
Southeast Asia where many of these ideas also have currency,
although in different form.
Um,
and the second part of it is that the enlightenment,
um,
you know,
the enlightenment was a,
was a mixed bag.
The French revolution was a horrible bloodbath just as Burke had predicted it
would be.
Um,
and part of it was because the enlightenment was not so much about many of the
values that I think we are rediscovering of community,
charity,
mutual interdependence that are,
that are much associated with religious
communal work than they are with enlightenment ideas.
Yeah.
The underpinning part,
I think you certainly agree with anything else.
So it's very close to my own perspective on it.
You know,
part of the problem is you say the enlightenment,
well of course who is against light.
Everyone wants light,
but the emphasis,
the implication is,
well,
prior to that must've been just those terrible dark ages.
That's all a distortion because you're,
you're dead,
right?
I mean,
I'd say the best of the enlightenment was a sort of,
um,
re presentation of key ideas out of the great biblical tradition.
So human dignity is one.
But think of,
you know,
Jefferson,
we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal.
Because look in classical political philosophy,
equality is not a huge value.
In fact,
in Plato and Aristotle,
Cicero,
people like that inequality is fundamental and the rightly ordered society,
you know,
it takes into account all these deep inequalities.
Where's the idea come from?
How come it's totally non self evident to Aristotle,
but it's totally self evident to Jefferson what intervened in there.
But,
but the Judeo Christian revelation,
you know,
um,
freedom,
equality,
human rights,
they're endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights.
So that to me is the,
uh,
the aftereffects of,
of Christian and Jewish revelation.
That's the best of the enlightenment.
And then the alignment does carry a dark side,
excuse the,
you know,
mixing metaphors.
But,
um,
it does,
uh,
hyperindividualism a hyper rationalism,
a certain closing in upon a purely scientific view of the world.
All of that is the dark side of the enlightenment.
So I would just look at it,
you know,
critically appreciating huge elements of it,
which I think fundamentally are grounded in the scripture.
And then being wary of certain,
you know,
negative qualities of it says maybe there's a little disagreement there just
because of the way choose generally have viewed science perhaps a little bit
differently.
Like,
well the hyper hyper scientific view of the world usually doesn't become in
conflict [inaudible] depends on age of really just use no,
I think for example,
I mean the vast majority of Jews,
even religious Jews don't find evolution to be,
but that's today don't find evolution to be in conflict with the Bible,
although some would but not,
but fewer.
And I think that Judaism is hospitable to science as a general rule.
Um,
what I would say though,
it emerges from the discussion is what you started with,
which is why is it that people are hospitable to these sorts of discussions?
Now the answer is because we have a world in which human power is magnified far
beyond anything we ever could have imagined before.
It to cure disease to,
I mean it's like I,
you know,
when I was in high school,
I was a pretty avid atheist and I read,
I memorize most of Bertrand Russell and I remember Russell writing and one of
his books people used to say that faith moved mountains and no one believed it.
Now they say the Adam mom moves mountains in,
everyone believes it.
And that was the hyper scientific view.
Well
now we have a world in which you can manipulate genes,
you can,
artificial intelligence is doing increasingly remarkable things and I think
people are recognizing,
not only recognizing,
but they're feeling on a gut level.
If we don't know what our first principles are,
this genie out of the bottle is going to destroy us.
So you don't fear a hyper scientific world as long as it comes within the
context.
I fear like,
like every per,
I almost want to rope in every thoughtful person.
I fear our information outrunning our wisdom.
Yes.
But as long as it doesn't,
then I don't fear it.
And that's closely my own view about a scientism.
I'm all in favor of the sciences and I always try to celebrate the fact that,
you know,
is yours live metro a priest formulated the Big Bang theory of cosmic origins.
I mean,
so the myth that the Catholic Church stands against the sciences.
Just that it's a myth.
Mendel.
Yeah,
right.
I mean there's so many people,
Copernicus himself,
you know,
but um,
scientism is the reduction of all knowledge to the scientific form of knowledge.
And that is a dark side of the enlightenment.
If you say that's the sum total of what we can know legitimately,
we know through the scientific method when in fact literature,
the Bible,
drama,
poetry,
a philosophy,
all that is,
is a bearer of wisdom.
But it's not scientific.
But I find dealing with the young people today,
the scientism is rampant.
So the binary option is science or nonsense.
Religion,
clearly not science.
Therefore now read Hitchens,
Dawkins and company,
you find that binary choice.
So I want to fight in favor of other ways of knowing that are not scientific.
Do you both sense that the resurgence of these ideas and the and the starvation
to just hear people talk about these things honestly is also sort of a failure
of the secular world.
I asked and in Jordan this,
and I hate the question because I,
I believe so much in the secular world and I,
and I love secular ideas that,
that free us in all of these things,
but that sort of,
there's a feeling right now and I think it has something to do with social media
and that our public squares have become sort of,
they're open,
which is great,
but then I've also become forums for hysteria and fake news and all of these
things that it's a sort of failure of the secular world.
I go ahead please.
I'm yes,
I'm not sure which world hasn't failed,
but the secular world certainly has and it hasn't parked because of exactly what
we've been saying,
which is once again removed first principles from the discussion.
What's the only thing you can be certain?
Tough.
The only thing you can be certain of is your own emotional reaction.
That bothers me.
Therefore,
it's bad.
And so what you get is,
as you said,
this hyper hysterical reaction,
everybody as a group to be offended because I,
this is what I feel and the idea that we can share principles and discuss them
has sort of disappeared.
Scholasticism Tom Jurich argument that things like we made our,
you know,
we cut our
teeth on,
they don't exist because there's no shared space in which we can all agree about
the same thing,
which is why because culture and,
and uh,
literature and music,
all of them are not shared.
They're all bulkinized.
And the only thing that we all share as politics,
so everything gets politicized.
So that's exactly what my next question was going to be,
which is our politics,
our new religion and how actually dangerous is that.
Yeah,
super dangerous.
I mean,
I would say with Paul Tillich who said,
you know,
religion is your ultimate concerns.
So everyone's got a religion.
Meaning there's something that's an ultimate value to you or put in Biblical
language,
something that you worship,
you know,
worship comes from worth ship.
What's the highest worth to you?
And you can until said all you need to know about a person,
you can find out by asking you one question,
what do you worship?
And that's definitely right.
It seems to me,
I mean,
what's the highest value to you when it's not God,
then we get mischief.
So put whatever you want in their place.
Science or politics or culture or the president or whatever.
Trouble Bible calls that idolatry by the way,
you know,
so that diagnosis is still all together valid and yes,
if politics becomes your ultimate concern,
that's going to be bad for you,
for everyone in the conversation and for politics.
Politics will become corrupt.
You know that that sort of explains the political situation we're in right now.
It does in many ways,
right?
And so that's,
that's the trouble.
See with a secularism that creates what Charles Taylor called the buffered self,
the self that's in this little self contained place,
buffered from any contact with the transcendent that becomes suffocating.
And there's another shadow side.
If you want a hyper,
rationalistic view of the world.
Would you both argue that,
and I think I probably asked you about this individually,
uh,
but I'm,
I'm sort of struggling with this one.
This has been where I'm at lately,
that on a micro level,
on a personal level,
say a Michael Shermer right here or Sam Harris right here could be absolutely
moral and decent and give to charity and live full rich lives that are every bit
as meaningful as,
as any any believer,
but that perhaps at the macro level that simply can't,
I think Sam is a good example,
I assume takes his morality extremely seriously as you know.
Um,
and,
and what I would say is that the,
there is,
there is what the mid 20th century Jewish philosopher will Herbert called cut
flower ethics.
Yeah.
He said they stay fresh for a while,
but the question is without the soil that nurtured them,
how long does that stay?
And so yeah,
you can get individual growths that are as beautiful as any growths that ever
existed.
But the question is transmissibility and,
and the thickness of the culture in which,
you know,
I mean if you look around the western world,
I think there's a lot of evidence that in fact ethics aren't that effectively
transmitted.
And part of the reason is because there used no soil,
there is no grounding,
there is no certainty.
If you,
for even wanting to introduce ethical education into school systems,
people would scream and yet without ethical education,
all the other things are imperiled.
So can,
I was helpful.
I've used that image before.
It never knowing where it came from.
Cut Flowers thing because it's really good,
you know,
for awhile.
Oh sure.
The country is kind of going on the fumes of,
of a real d system,
but if you take those flowers out of the ground,
they are going to fade.
So that's who was that again?
We'll Herbert Protestant,
Catholic Jew help us right away.
A century.
That's right.
Yeah.
I know.
That's where it came from.
The way I would also say that that idea,
and I think again,
I'm sure that the,
I'm sure that the bishop,
I suspect the fishing poles agree with me,
I'm going to get to some days,
right,
is that religion doesn't mean that you have to walk into my synagogue.
Um,
you should,
but it doesn't mean that you have to,
right?
No,
but seriously,
religion has reinvented it all sorts of ways.
I mean,
um,
my,
uh,
my niece's husband is one of the one,
one of the people high up in burning man and there's a lot that goes on there
that has a serious,
like a serious religious component even though they may not call it religion.
The question is can society reinvent religion or take from religion and
reconfigure it in ways that are enduring and lasting and meaningful?
It doesn't have to be at the small Oh,
orthodoxy.
So I got a good philosophical one for it.
If somebody could come up with that,
would you guys be against it?
If someone could come up with that bedrock that would allow those fresh cut
flowers to stay and stay and say a new version of all of this,
would it be felt more contemporary or something like that.
But,
and it,
and it gave all of the answers that you are at this,
the,
here you may come across a disagreement because Judaism is not solely morals and
behaviors that tell us what people in a history and a land and a language and
lots of other things,
and that is not going to get replaced by somebody coming up with an ethical
system.
Right?
So then when I've seen the ground finally is God,
you know,
so called God what you want.
I mean,
that's the unconditioned of the unconditioned.
True,
good and beautiful.
That's God.
And that's the ground for these great ethical commitments.
I used to,
I never met Christopher Hitchens put,
you know,
I read them and watched him carefully and I was always struck by the intensity
of his ethical commitments was to me,
seemed incoherent in light of a completely atheist view of the world.
But there was a Jeremiah like passion for ethical and I would say,
look,
that's it.
That's the door in.
If you want,
you can do cosmological type arguments.
That's had very little traction with Hitchens.
But my way in for him was follow your own ethical passion.
You're going to come.
Finally.
What I mean by God,
which is the unconditioned good.
You don't want just any old justice.
You want justice all the time.
You want justice in every way you want.
You want justice to fill
the whole earth.
You know,
that's a hunger and thirst for God.
I think one of prophetic got there at the end.
What is the right answer is,
is that they're already there.
So he's not that.
They're trying to get there.
You've already been seized by God.
If you've got that passion for justice,
that's God already working in you.
You know?
So it's not so much the quest for God out there,
but God's already grasped you at the root of your being and filled you with this
prophetic passion.
So I would say in a way he's,
he's already been found,
you know?
So let's get to some of the differences here.
So we're talking about Judeo Christian values.
Yeah.
But those are not exactly the same thing.
So what maybe each of you could pick perhaps one thing now I guess Judaism came
first,
not I guess,
but Judaism,
Christianity differ,
which is in vicarious atonement and the Jewish tradition,
if you don't make reparations to the person whom you've heard,
God can't forgive you.
That's a big difference.
I mean,
I'm,
this was illustrated most famously,
not exclusively,
but most famously,
um,
when one of the prosecutors at Nurenberg asked the priest,
does that mean that if,
say I human repented on his deathbed and accepted Jesus,
he would be forgiven and saved.
But Anne Frank would go to hell.
And the priest said,
that's the mystery of grace.
That's a difference.
Mm hmm.
If I were to name a difference,
uh,
it's,
it's Christ.
There's the difference.
So I will not reduce things to ethics.
We find all kinds of common ground when it comes to ethics.
But I'd resist the Conti and move to reduce religion to ethics.
I mean,
that's a dimension of it.
It's a,
it's a consequence of it.
The difference is,
is Jesus,
you know,
Jesus means the coming together of divinity and humanity in such a way that
humanity is transfigured and brought up into a share in the divine life.
And that's the mystical heart of Christianity from that flows all kinds of
ethical implications.
But that's the central mystery I think is,
uh,
divinization.
The Greek fathers called theosis,
the Latins called DF fecaccio that God became one of us,
that we might become a share in his own life.
And the Jews call it
false.
That's why that's why to call someone a Jew for Jesus is,
is an oxymoron.
Because that was actually the critical dividing line between Jews and Christians
was the acceptance of Jesus as divine or the son of God or the Messiah.
So,
so what do you see,
you sort of wrong isn't the right term,
but where do you see as conflicting with your values are conflicting with Jewish
values?
So first of all,
a human being doesn't become God.
And the Jewish tradition,
God is transcendent and the imminent,
but always the intangible.
And that does not take human form,
never took human form.
Um,
and uh,
also even though Christianity talks about three and one and one and three,
I remember when I was in high school and we had a,
a baptist preacher come to our high school and told us,
you know,
you seem like nice boys and girls,
but you're all going to hell.
Um,
and I asked him,
I said,
well,
if something is perfect,
it doesn't need anything added to it.
So as the father,
perfect.
And he said yes.
And I said,
we're done.
We're grinding,
We don't eat anything else.
Um,
that's,
I mean that's been the Jewish view and,
but I,
but I also want to say this is an argument that has gone on for thousands of
years and every now and then I'll get someone on my Facebook and say,
what about this verse?
And I'll think really,
really well.
That's why,
you know,
it's almost,
it almost feels a little silly for me to frame a question like that,
but I know,
I know that people watching don't want you guys to sit here and sort of agree on
every shirt though you disagree on the margins or are you just,
are people of different faiths and that's just fine.
But I think there's always like this feeling of like a list.
There's some core thing that is not argued about that,
that we're missing something.
I don't know.
I like religious argument and to do it publicly as a good thing.
Yeah.
And like I found it,
I've been involved in many,
we're putting this on youtube and the commenters are very tiny.
Oh,
believe me.
Uh,
but I've been involved a lot of Catholic Jewish dialogues over the years.
We hardly ever mentioned the j word by which I mean Jesus.
So we tend to say it's great that we're nice to each other and we've overcome
these old,
you know,
animosities and we stand for the great ethical principles,
which is great and true.
And I never ever want to go back behind it.
But I would say,
well now what about Jesus?
Let's talk about Jesus.
And then people get very squirrely.
Now I certainly understand,
given our rather regrettable history on this thing,
you know,
that we're always worried about religious violence.
I get it.
At the same time,
I think it's,
it's a does it around them that we'd find a way to have a respectful and
nonviolent argument because I think argument is a good thing.
And as you say,
quite rightly,
that doesn't bother me.
The rabbinic tradition,
the scholastic tradition,
they long arguments.
Thomas Aquinas argues with everybody.
There's something very Talmudic about Thomas Aquinas.
And I think that's a great thing that we need to recover it.
There's something very urban about acquaintance.
You know,
he,
uh,
theology had moved out of the monasteries into the cities,
into places like Paris and there's a lot of different points of view and people
shouting things from the,
from the floor and his writings reflect that lively sort of conversation.
I like that.
I think that's a healthy thing,
you know?
Well,
I think that partly explains what's happening on Youtube these days with
conversation.
I mean that's what brought you guys here and the fascination with religion.
Now it's often done poorly.
God knows there's people often just sharing a lot of strong feelings,
but I liked the fact there's obviously great interest in religion.
Yeah.
So I thought this would be interesting.
I know you can't obviously tell me what you are,
the people of your congregation are coming to you with privately,
but I wonder if there's general trends that maybe are the same or different that
you both are hearing about.
So I wonder if you could sort of tell me just a general trend of the type of
things that people are struggling with right now.
Sure.
I would say any,
have you seen that change or let's say 20 years?
I would say the trend is finding a partner being lonely.
I think there is.
I think we are,
I mean,
you know he wrote,
I don't know how many years ago Putnam wrote the book bowling alone,
but I think when we're bowling alone more and more and more and the more
effective technology becomes,
the more we can insulate ourselves and cocoon ourselves against it.
Against the world,
you can order your food in and you can watch whatever you want.
And,
and yet there is this deep human desire for connection.
The problem is that connecting takes work and it takes effort.
And so in some ways we're becoming a less effortful society and therefore a
lonelier society.
I get a lot of that.
Um,
and then there are all the range of human problems,
family problems,
marriage problems,
um,
and meaning problems.
Um,
I,
I think there's a sense in which just like all the commandments could be reduced
to do not steal because all of them are a form of stealing in one way or
another.
All human problems can be reduced to,
I don't have meaning because other people give you meaning.
Community gives you meaning a good job gives you meaning the spouse that loves
you.
I mean,
you know,
meeting is sort of,
it's the ground.
It's the Tilex and ground of being that we're all looking for.
Yeah.
What about for you?
What sort of training,
you know?
Yeah.
When I did find both in my ministry as a bishop,
but also kind of the online work that I do in evangelization is the meaning
thing.
Because the stats are all showing,
you know,
when I was a kid back in the seventies about 3% of our country would have said,
I have no religion.
I mean 97% of the country would have said,
I'm religious now,
maybe not ardently so,
but 97% and had a religious affiliation.
Now it's 25% among young people.
It's 40% among young Catholics.
So 30 and younger,
it's 50% now say I have no religion.
And that expresses itself as a very deep hunger and alienation.
And I sense that all the time.
Um,
people want truth,
they want meaning,
they want religious purpose,
but it's the cut flowers thing that more and more they're losing contact with
the sources of that.
And it's causing enormous existential suffering.
The pope has talked about the existential margins.
I like that,
you know,
the church goes out to the margins,
he says mean economic and political margins,
but he also named the existential margins,
people that are cut off from God.
And I find that all the time more than when I started 30 some years ago.
But also I wonder what you think about the fact that that's true here.
And it's true,
certainly true for Jews here.
I mean there's no difference,
but elsewhere in the world that's not true.
Yeah.
There are parts of the world where religious affiliation is exploded.
That's right.
In the West is true.
Right,
exactly.
But in the West it isn't.
Right.
So what's the,
what's the pivot?
What's the difference?
Well,
in some ways,
you know,
it's from maternity to post maternity or you might say that shadow of
enlightenment,
finding more and more expression.
You know,
if,
if a hyper rationalism of scientistic view of the world,
the buffered self,
if all that is taking more and more root in people's psyches,
that's going to happen.
You know,
the alienation will be deeper.
Um,
as you say,
a lot of other societies around the world,
religion is still very strong and growing.
Um,
but yeah,
I think in the West that's,
it's the,
it's the aftereffects of,
of maternity and probably post-modernity.
So I also,
I want to bring in,
uh,
Aldous Huxley here and I would love to have out of this actually [inaudible] it
wasn't bad.
We're going to summon him.
He doesn't have that far to go in brave new world.
Um,
which I have to say I think about all the time as I read about China.
Yeah.
They're in be including these policies.
They're instituting these policies that increased authoritarianism.
They're making people,
they're satisfying the basic needs that people have.
I think that increasingly as you satisfy certain basic needs that people have,
they will give up on everything else that they don't absolutely have to have.
So,
I mean,
this is why there's that great speech in,
in,
uh,
in brave new world where he says,
I want God,
I want sin.
I want messiness.
I want unhappiness.
Um,
people are opting out of that because the truth is when people come to,
to a synagogue or to a church and they say,
you know,
they're sad.
It's so hard.
And I,
you know,
the places too political to political by the way always means I didn't get what
I wanted.
That's what political always means.
Nobody gets what they want.
And it says the stupid,
um,
what they're saying is the friction of dealing with other human beings in
uncomfortable ways as something I don't have to put up with.
So I won't,
I'll text instead of call.
You know,
when I was,
when,
when all of us were younger,
they used to say about a telephone that it gave you intimacy without danger
because you could talk on the phone,
but you didn't have to face the person.
Now it's like multiplied many times.
Texting gives you into,
there is actually danger,
but not the kind of danger of facing someone.
And so we created all these technologies that are like Soma to make people to
low people into each individual comfort and we're paying a tremendous price.
So is this the irony though?
I mean,
what brings us the three of us together is the Internet,
right?
I mean,
yeah,
it's this incredibly powerful thing that now is,
is spreading the messages that you guys care about is also the very force that
is allowing for us to be,
uh,
you know,
alone when we're surrounded by people always goes with all things humans.
I mean,
there's both,
couldn't bet you mentioned Huxley,
I'll mention to her,
to Sheridan,
you know,
the Great Jesuit,
uh,
scientists theologian,
but he talked about the Noah's fear.
He dreamed of this next stage of evolution.
We're,
the whole planet would be connected through a sort of brain like structure.
And it seems so fantastic.
Back in the 1950s,
well,
it's happened were the results of it were participating in it.
And there's something beautiful about that.
He,
he,
he dreamed of the sense of connection that we're going to have.
And we do have a,
I mean,
I don't want to stress the positive side of Internet and social media and all
that stuff is terrific in many ways.
But like all things human and biblical,
people know that it's gonna go bad.
You know in time sin is going to reassert itself and the thing will be corrupted
in some ways but,
but the positive remains and I love it.
I love the Noah's fear.
I think that's a positive development.
Yeah.
It's interesting because I've had obviously you both on individually,
we both got into hot water from different communities online after we chatted
because I had you on and I had people's say on the left who are angry that I
even sat down with ambition gay.
I sat down with the Bishop and you told me church doctrine and then told me a
little bit about your personal feelings and people were just annoyed that I even
sat down with you the first place you got into a lot of hot water because you
said something to the effect of your head and your heart not being at exactly
the same place with this.
And you had,
so then you had people say more on the right are more traditional or whatever
you want to call that angry you.
And I thought we must've done something right here because we're both getting,
you know,
hate,
so to speak from different quarters and that,
that sort of the beauty and the horrors of the Internet.
Yeah.
And um,
I mean I've sent it from the very beginning when I started doing work on
youtube.
And as I say,
I didn't even know you could comment.
I was that naive about it.
Youtube.
I'd put things up there and I'm just inundated with negative comments because
you know,
the vast majority of people we all know don't write in to say,
Gosh,
I had John [inaudible] video.
God bless him.
No Psalm 97 per gallon.
Now black really weren't saying 97% are going after you.
But I mean now I'm used to it and I like it because I get some traction,
you know,
I can,
I can.
All right.
At the very least,
now I can find some way to engage you and talk to you.
I got to remind myself all the time.
There's a person behind those,
those are harsh words.
You know that somebody may be in his mom's basement or who knows where he is or
she is,
but somebody was writing those words as,
as vicious and cruel as they might be.
Um,
so it's a pastoral opportunity.
I mean,
I wouldn't want to miss that.
And I've encouraged,
you know,
my students,
this is the cutting edge of pastoral ministry anyways.
We've got to learn how to engage that world very creatively or we're missing a
giant opportunity.
So it's interesting this just talking about the gay marriage issue for a minute,
which it's already illegal here.
I don't even really like belaboring it because it seems like the ship has sailed
and most people are basically okay with data at this point.
Um,
Jews sorta were ahead on this.
Generally speaking,
generally speaking,
the secular Jews,
right?
Not thoroughly students.
Um,
you had a little bit of an insurrection in your own,
in your own tempo when you took a position pro gay marriage.
So,
so what is the,
uh,
well,
what is it?
Is it,
is it about the history of Jews being the other or something else that allow
Jews generally to evolve on social issues?
A little [inaudible] a really interesting question about why Jews tend to be,
I mean,
80% of Jews find themselves on the left of the political spectrum that has
shifted somewhat in the last,
I don't know,
20,
30 years.
Um,
but it's still true and there's been a lot of diagnoses about why that is,
whether it's limitation from the right or cheering from the left.
Um,
I think they're a little bit about exactly.
Yeah.
So I think that there is,
um,
a lot of discussion in society right now is about the perception of the other
and I think Jews have an instinctive otherness.
Um,
there's a phrase in the,
in the Bible that's,
that uses the word Gare Tosha,
which means a resident alien and a classic commentary on it says,
this is how you should always feel in the world.
Like you're both resident and alien.
And I think that that's been the Jewish historical experience.
They always felt like they didn't entirely belong.
So when they see someone else who doesn't entirely belong,
there's an instinctive sympathy that gets played out that way.
Um,
and,
and I think that that is still true for most Jews and even Jews on who would
find themselves on the right in this,
we'd still say that they,
they have that instinctive sympathy.
It expresses itself in different ways.
So that written,
I'm Jewish.
Yeah,
that rings very true to me.
Does that,
so Christianity,
which has been more of a stamp,
majority religion,
let's say,
you wouldn't inherently feel that.
Do you think
that has a little bit to do with no,
I think there's a,
there's a tension in what you're talking about,
you know,
is obviously a deeply biblical intuition about compassion for the other,
and especially for someone on the margins of all that.
It's there.
I think the,
and Catholic teaching reflects that.
The deep compassion for everybody.
At the same time,
the natural law tradition that comes up not just out of Greek philosophy,
but out of biblical sources and the nature of marriage and the integrity of,
of the sexual act,
etc. Etc.
I mean all that is deeply biblical in its origins.
Its,
it's supported by the philosophical tradition.
And let's face it,
there was a consensus of the people that up until about 25 years ago that this
was the right way to understand marriage,
sexuality.
So I,
I wouldn't want to characterize the church's position as somehow retrograde or
we're so behind the times.
It's,
it's coming up out of this very traditional,
we were just talking about,
you know,
so I'd make that distinction between defending the integrity of,
of marriage classically defined and reaching out with love and compassion and
nonviolence and welcome to everybody.
You know,
I think that's the place the church wants to finest.
Oh,
so here's the question.
Here's a hard,
um,
and perhaps a unpopular thing to say,
but you're exactly right that it was only in the 1980s that Andrew Sullivan
wrote about gay marriage.
And it's very recent in the span of history.
Sure.
And,
and you see this dynamic being played out again and again.
So for example,
when my daughter went to college,
um,
which was,
she's just graduating.
So four years ago,
the first questions they asked them was,
what's your name?
Give us a favorite animal and what is your preferred Gender Pronoun?
So some people said call me them for example,
and got very offended by it.
Got very
offended when someone would say you.
Yeah.
Um,
and in discussions with her,
I was saying to her,
you know,
yeah,
I understand why people who are young don't yet get what it is to grow up and be
oriented a certain way.
They won't until they're my age and then there'll be something else that the
young person will ask them,
but they won't be able to do.
Um,
but there has to be a circle of compassion here,
which I understand it's hard for people who feel themselves not accepted,
but they have to realize to some extent that people are trained in lots of deep
ways.
And I first learned this,
I took my junior year abroad in Scotland and there was this guy who made a
really aunt,
didn't know I was Jewish,
made a really antisemitic remarks.
So I started to talk to him.
I did exactly what you said.
I took time was not a pastor,
but I took it as an opportunity.
And after several discussions he said to me,
you know,
I worshiped my father and my father always told me that Jews were terrible.
And it's so hard for me to see them because I feel like I'm betraying my father.
And it was the first time I really understood that you can be trained in such a
way that it's hard to get out of and that the victim in quote of your training
has to have a certain amount of compassion for the time it takes for others to
adjust.
Oh,
that's powerful.
What are some of the other issues that,
that people are coming to you about?
Well,
the one I sent the most,
as I say,
is this quest for,
for God.
I mean,
it's a hunger and thirst for God.
I would just use the most fundamental religious language I can find.
Uh,
people are,
are dissatisfied with the goods of the world.
And especially in the West.
They have them in huge quantities.
They have all the wealth and pleasure and power and honor.
They can get in many cases and then there are desperately unhappy and they want
something which the world can't give.
They want something to scientists can't give.
They want something secularism can't give.
And so in a way,
there was a great opportunity.
Now it seems to me for religious people to again publicly reassert the great
spiritual tradition.
So how important is happiness?
I was just gonna say,
I was just going to say I'm,
one of the things we have lost is the capacity to be creatively unhappy because
for most of human history that wasn't what I mean,
the pursuit of happiness made.
Most people did not assume that they had a right to be happy.
And in fact being unhappy was one of the wellsprings of creativity and art and
literature and,
and social movements and so on.
And I think now,
um,
because our mechanisms for alleviating acute on happiness are so good,
both medically and socially,
I think we've a little bit lost the capacity to be unhappy.
So the founding fathers kind of burdened us with the pursuit to be happening,
right?
Like the pursuit of happy.
But it was interesting about that.
To me it's
very enlightened man sort of thing.
Is it Jefferson didn't define happiness.
He said we have a right to pursue it according to our own,
you know,
will prior to that,
to that period what preoccupied the of the great thinkers was.
Well,
what is happiness?
You know,
so whether it's Aquinas or at Cicero or is Plato and Aristotle,
they're deeply interested in what makes us happy.
There's a shift at maternity that says,
well,
we don't really know what's going to make us happy,
but you pursue it your way.
You pursue it that way and we have a right to do it.
But I think that question's still haunts the human heart.
How important do you think the question,
it's the only question that finally manners,
I mean,
what do you think that's more important than the question of meaning?
It is the question of meaning.
It is the question,
the same thing.
What makes me find what gives me beatitude?
Oh,
now that doesn't mean psychological contentment.
I quite agree with you there.
I mean,
we're not going to get psychological commitment very often.
And I think you're right that it's an engine of progress.
The fact that we don't have psychological contentment,
beatitude,
oh,
is a,
is the joy of a heart or its Shalom or it's this piece at the level of the soul
that people want.
I won't get it perfectly in this life.
You know,
I,
I aspire to it perfectly in the,
in the life to come,
but it's deep in me to want it.
And that's what drives me,
you know?
And if you suppress that Saint John of the cross of that,
if you suppress that very dangerous things happen psychologically and
spiritually,
and I think you see that all over the place,
now that question's not important.
Don't worry about that question.
Seek wealth,
pleasure,
honor,
power secret scientists can tell you,
but that's not going to satisfy the longing of the heart.
And
Shimon Peres,
who was the president of Israel,
prime minister briefly,
um,
she had the great contribution of the Jews to the world was dissatisfaction.
And if you think about it,
I mean,
if people act towards the end of their life,
they,
you ask them when they were happiest.
It wasn't once they achieved the goal that they work,
it's always on the way there.
I mean there is something about unhappiness that makes you happy,
strange as it sounds.
Yeah.
Well it gives you drive this,
right.
And those are the moments that you think up.
Nostalgically yeah,
but how important,
so you said it's the same question.
I think so meaning the pursuit of happiness in the group and the pursuit of
morality of meaning of meaning.
Do you think that's the side question?
I,
well,
I wouldn't know.
I wouldn't use the word happy.
I would say the pursuit of meaning.
I mean you can be deeply troubled,
pained and on.
You wouldn't call yourself happy.
Um,
and yet you would say,
I'm where I'm supposed to be and this is,
I'm looking for a different word because happy has connotation and I agree with
psychological contain exactly.
Of something too trivial,
almost interesting.
I would agree with you on that.
Uh,
Aquinas says,
for example,
you want to see a picture of Beata Tuto.
So the Latin for happiness,
he said,
you look in the crucify Jesus because Jesus on the cross wealth,
pleasure,
honor power.
He's got none of them out.
They're all stripped away,
but he's doing the will of his father.
And so he says,
paradoxically,
that's a picture of a happy man.
Now,
no psychological contentment whatsoever on the country.
But yet we hold that image up in Catholic churches anyway and we want people to
contemplate that image.
You know,
so not a picture of someone wealthy,
someone powerful,
someone
full of psychological pleasure.
We hold up the crucified Jesus and we say,
that's Beata Tuto that's what you're seeking,
you know,
to be stripped away of many of those things.
So self sacrifices,
somebody who sacrifices themselves happy,
I don't think happy is the writer,
right is the right word,
you know?
But there is something,
right?
Exactly.
Yes.
How about Shalom?
Something fulfilled.
Yeah,
whole mean.
And maybe are you both constantly amazed that just what people can put up with
that they don't think they can,
that people come to you disease or death or whatever it is,
lost their job in the house,
the whole thing.
And they think everything's falling apart and that,
you know,
in most cases they always make it through one way or another.
That must be one of the things that you,
you both find that got to give you some.
So I just,
uh,
just a couple of months ago I did the funeral of Max Webb who died at 101 and he
had survived 18 concentration camps and he was a remarkable,
just a remarkable man.
Um,
and,
and he would,
I mean,
he,
when he,
when the Nazis came to his town,
he said to his mother,
if you hear that I was shot or hung,
it might be true.
If you hear that I starved,
don't believe it.
And that's what he was like.
He just had a life force that was indomitable.
And what he put up with in his life was,
you know,
literally unimaginable to someone who didn't go through a similar experience.
And so yes,
when I look at that and I see,
and he was I think genuinely most of the time I happy man.
Um,
and I think that that's because there was no question in his life in his,
in his mind that life was meaningful,
that God was real,
that miracles were real,
that his survival had a purpose,
that he had to commemorate the people who didn't survive.
And I mean,
in some ways his life was more people by the people who weren't there then for
most of us,
by the people who are,
what do you chalk it up to?
The young person though or child,
you know,
I don't know how old he was exactly when that happened.
Yeah,
he was young that he could,
that a young person could have that you haven't had the time to think.
So I think part of it,
I mean part of it is intrinsic nature.
There are people who are,
you know,
there are people who are fortunate enough to be,
to have that God given resilience.
Uh,
and then I think that part of it was the,
the furnace that he went through that refined his character and made him
determined not to have lived in Maine.
It's reminds me of,
so I'll just a quick story.
Hugo Grin,
who was a rabbi in,
in Britain when he was a child.
He was in Auschwitz and his father,
it was Hanukkah and we've just finished Konica.
So his father took the margarine ration and he used it to light the Hanukkah
Menorah and green who was like 11 or 12 at the time,
like screamed at his father and said,
how can you were supposed to be eating this?
This is our,
this is what survives.
His father said,
my child,
we've learned that you can live for three weeks without food.
You can live for three days without water,
but you can't live for three minutes without hope.
So the people who learned that lesson we're different is ultimately concern.
Yeah.
I mean,
you're up against it as a religious figure all the time.
You're up against suffering from the very beginning.
I remember when I was newly ordained,
I'm 26 years old,
you know,
and I was in the funeral directors car behind the third hearse of that week.
I was doing my third funeral that weekend.
I remember thinking,
what am I doing?
I'm 26 years old.
It's a beautiful day.
I'm behind my third,
you know,
but you do it because those are those limit experiences where people have a
sense of God.
It's often when pushed to those limits.
Uh,
just,
you know,
recently I'm out here in Sunny,
beautiful southern California and all my Chicago friends are,
oh,
there you go.
New Montecito and Santa Barbara.
Of course,
Santa Barbara gets the terrible Thomas fire followed by the even more terrible
mudslide that killed 20 people in one night.
Um,
I was at a funeral of a man who lost his wife and two kids in that mud slide.
So that's,
but you know,
I mean,
we go there,
we always go to those places were called to stand in those places and have that
awful responsibility and awful in the full sense of that term to speak a divine
word at that moment.
But those are the limit experiences where people often have the most powerful
sense of God,
of the unconditioned.
Some people are able to say,
like I,
I,
I had a couple of brain tumors and I went through lymphoma and people would,
and whenever people come to my office and say,
you know,
how did,
how did you feel?
Because people always come to your office to say,
why me?
Right.
Always.
Yeah.
I said to them,
look,
what I was thinking was I was born in the richest country in the world.
I had parents who loved me.
I was never hungry.
Why me?
I mean,
that's what I was asking.
Why me?
The other stuff,
it's like I don't expect it.
I don't think any of us should expect an uninterrupted,
we're on a blessing,
but what we tend to do is we count everything that's good in our lives as
natural and everything that's bad as unfair.
Obviously there are radically unfair things,
but for most of us,
I mean,
we're very lucky to be here.
Just very lucky.
Yeah.
Just on a,
on a purely personal level,
not just the sort of ideal level.
Um,
there's got to be those moments that,
you know,
not just when you're 26,
but even now where someone presents something to you and it's like,
where,
where do you guys just get the,
just sort of afforded you to an energy to get up and have to be strong when you
just don't feel like,
I know what it's like doing what I do.
I have,
and dealing with certain amount of hate and it can be,
I'll have a different answer.
All right.
I think so.
I mean,
my mind is the holy hour.
So I mean,
I begin every day with an hour of prayer.
Most of it in silence before the blessed sacrament.
I mean,
so it's just this time of communion with the Lord and I,
I'm a morning guy.
I wake up early and so before any distractions come in,
I'll spend an hour with a cup of coffee and the Tabernacle,
you know,
so it's just a time of communion
and that's where I bring all this stuff to the Lord.
I'll bring what I'm worried about.
I'll bring peoples needs and concerns.
People say all the time,
you know,
to priests and bishops,
pray for me,
pray for me.
So I try to do that.
Like,
Lord,
I don't remember all their names,
but everyone that asked me to pray for them,
I'm now doing it.
Right.
You know?
But that's for me,
super important because you're,
you're absolutely right.
There are times like I have no one to say,
I don't know what to say.
I remember years ago now I'm a young priest and there was a,
uh,
a man who had killed themselves before killing himself,
had killed his son.
And this is made the papers,
you know,
I was at the funeral parlor at not attending vet wake,
but another one from my parish.
But on the way out,
I noticed these two coffins in the room.
It's very unusual,
you know,
and then I saw the name.
I know that's,
so I went in,
you know,
and um,
at the,
the wife and mother saw me at the collar on,
she comes over and she went
like,
okay,
you know,
religious guy or I did
that.
Okay.
And that was it.
I mean,
I,
I didn't say one word to her.
I didn't,
I didn't know what I could say.
But somehow,
weirdly,
you know,
this just the presence of a religious representative going like,
look,
I don't know.
I mean,
I don't know either,
but,
but somehow there's a context of something here that we're both acknowledging
through all of this darkness.
So that's what your face passed away.
I mean,
we don't get a full idea that presence is more powerful than the answers.
Answers are.
But presences,
I was going to say is that I think actually part of what,
part of what I find is what I'm sure you find.
Do you think,
oh my God,
I can't believe another gotta do another podcast today.
How do you drag yourself in here?
But then the doing brings its own powerful energy and so there are times when
I'll say,
I can't believe I got to go to a wedding.
I can't believe I got to go do a few.
I really don't want to get up.
I really don't want to get dressed,
but there is never a time when I'm standing up and doing it right.
I don't think,
oh my God,
I'm so blessed to be able to do this because there is in I am a,
I'm a big advocate of what used to be called the James Lang theory of emotion,
which is not that you feel something and then you do it,
but you do something and feeling as will then rise and swell to fill the moment.
Then that's what happens.
You
He,
the one that comes to my mind is the song.
They go out,
they go out full of tears carrying seed for the sewing.
They come back,
they come back full of song carrying the sheets.
That to me is pastoral experience.
Very often as you,
you're driving to the hospital and you're like,
okay,
right,
I don't want to go to the hospital.
Yeah.
And you're kind of full of tears about it,
but then you come back,
you come back
singing,
right.
I mean the car singing is that there's something,
it did something to you and I think James is right as well.
It must be nice for you guys just to be able to admit that briefly because I
think people probably look at you guys until it's that woman going like this.
Yeah,
right.
Like that you're these like super human things or something or that you're
supposed to know everything and give them everything.
Right.
So a moment where you can
admit,
oh,
I was in the car and this,
or I didn't want to get out of bed.
He'd probably just for you guys.
So it's a little therapy here as well.
Yeah.
I don't even have a question for this,
but I just thought this was an interesting thing that happened to me about two
months ago.
Uh,
Jordan and I,
you know,
were on tour together.
We were in Salt Lake City.
And a couple came up to me before the show and they just looked very sad and
disturbed and they came up to me and they said this was there one night out
there.
They've been dealing with a lot.
Uh,
her father had just died within the week.
he had been diagnosed,
the guy that I was standing with had been diagnosed I think with testicular
cancer and that she was pregnant with their baby that they had been told was not
going to live,
but the child was still in utero.
And I did,
I mean,
I truly,
I had one of those moments where I had no idea what to say.
It was like slow motion.
I was like,
they,
you know,
I had given them tickets to my meet and greet after not knowing any of this.
So when I came up to them,
I was like being all friendly and everything and I did not know what to say and
it was,
and I just,
I just said,
God bless you guys.
I could not,
like,
it was like the old would seem like the only word that add any value whatsoever.
So I don't even have a question for that was interesting that it was just what
there was nothing left in my brain to say.
Basically.
That's what you said though.
That is very interesting to me.
Cause I mean,
some were in your,
in your soul,
those words came out.
You know,
even if,
and I guess you know from what you've said explicitly,
you're,
you're a nonbeliever,
right?
I,
at this point,
I wouldn't say I'm a nonbeliever,
he was before the [inaudible].
Interesting.
I think that's where the worth just meditating on that came from somewhere in
your developing psyche and soul or whatever.
And that's very powerful.
It seems to me.
And I would say to you is,
I mean,
yes,
what you told them was the only thing you can really tell someone who's
suffering,
which is you're not alone.
That's,
that is the essential human message.
You are not alone.
God bless you.
You,
you responded,
you were present in their moment of pain and,
and there's nothing else that someone can ask of you.
Yeah,
it was.
It was certainly powerful.
All right,
so I want to wrap with,
let's give some people some concrete steps to have these conversations for
themselves.
Do you guys have any tricks and I,
and I really mean this sort of within the realm of what your last book was
about,
to help people do some of this online.
It's one thing when they come to your offices,
it's one thing when we sit here and do this,
but in the online world,
which we've already discussed,
there's some great things going on and some terrible things going on.
How do people do this because it's just a litany of,
you know,
one upping each other and taking each other down in the rest of it.
Are there tricks that you guys have found that,
that you think can make these conversations a little more effective basically?
Well,
I,
it turned the practical level.
There's sort of grander philosophical visits we can about it,
but it's a practical level.
That thing I said earlier is always realize you're dealing with a person behind
the words.
It's,
it's so easy to say,
look,
those words,
our wounding me and so I'm going to respond,
you know,
with wounding words in my own,
there's a person,
there's a person behind those words.
Um,
but secondly,
I mean to move out of a purely emotional,
um,
ambit,
I have nothing against the emotions,
but if you stay purely when the emotional Abbott,
we start doing this,
this back and forth,
you know,
you've hurt me,
I'll hurt you.
Is there something of objective truth that we can talk about?
So even as you're objecting to me as people often do,
you know,
I think,
okay,
a really,
really smart people in the great tradition have held the central thing.
You're saying,
even within all of this kind of jumble language or highly charged emotion,
there's a,
there's an argument in there,
there's a truth claim being made.
Can you identify that and doing a way that is very affirming.
What I hear you saying through all of this is this,
and actually to say lots of really smart people have held this position.
Do I have that right?
And like,
that kind of response I find can just disarm people and can break through some
of the emotion,
the emotionality and try to now we can begin to have an argument,
we can start talking about the truth claim being made.
It is,
it is useful to remember that no one wins arguments.
They're fun to have,
but it's,
I have almost argument as a process of convincing yourself that you were right.
I've almost never walked away from an argument saying,
yeah,
he was right.
I was wrong.
A out argued me,
I'm done.
Um,
and so if you realize that if you argue with the person,
if you resist the,
the desire to just argue and you resist the desire to be clever,
which is really hard,
it's really hard.
You think of a clever response.
And to not say it.
My father used to tell me that there's a Yiddish phrase who is a hero,
one who resists a wisecrack and,
and I'm not at all heroic.
Yes.
This is what I wrote.
Exactly.
So very good.
Um,
and then you use the magic.
There is a magic tool that human beings have,
which is the question.
You've just ask a question instead of arguing or you do,
you say,
what do you think about this?
Or how do you feel about that?
It's remarkable how powerful a question can be.
Um,
Hi Robbie,
who was a Nobel prize winning physicist at the end of his life and how arts and
paper and Israel,
and they said to him,
who has the greatest influence in your life?
And he said,
my mother,
because when I used to come home from a,
which was Jewish religious school in Eastern Europe,
everyday she would say to me,
gets he,
did you ask any good questions today?
And I always thought that was great.
So you learn to ask questions and you might be amazed that people tell you
things and the respect for your opponent.
I'm thinking now with this conversation between a rabbi in a Catholic bishop,
my hero,
Thomas Aquinas,
who read everybody and dialogue with
everybody.
Uh,
the Christian version,
of course,
but also the pagan philosophers and scientists,
also a Muslim scholars.
Also most of my monities always refers to my monities is Robbie Moy says,
oh your first and very respectfully,
you know,
um,
which is not the communist attitude and the Christian Middle Ages,
but there is a quaint as having this seminar conversation with all these
different voices and speaking with great respect of them and to them.
I think that's a great model for us.
No.
Hmm.
All right.
So I do have one bonus one four since we're right between Hanukkah and Christmas
right now.
I have always personally liked when Hanukkah and Christmas were at the same
time.
So that would just be like,
then everyone's sort of celebrating the exact same thing at the same time and
it's like whatever the differences are,
just doesn't matter.
Everyone's getting presents on at least one of the same days,
something like that.
This year,
Hanukkah was early.
I always say,
well,
you could probably do a show on that when they tell you the Jewish holidays are,
but let's say early,
I'm just curious if you,
have you done,
have you ever thought of that or whether it,
do you like it better when they fall out together because maybe there's
something in a wider community or does it not matter at all?
Um,
I've now,
I mean,
I,
I look,
I really,
I've always been a fan of Christmas.
I enjoy Christmas.
I like Christmas music.
I especially like the Christmas music that was written by Jews.
So it's not,
and I think that the reason that I like Christmas is because when your hands are
full,
so you don't feel like you need a handout,
you can enjoy other people's religious tradition when you feel secure in your
own.
And so it never felt like a threat to me.
It always felt like a beautiful holiday.
And I loved it.
And also because of one of the things that I always tell high school students,
which is that you can't spend your life living in the minds of other people.
You know,
we spent so much time worrying about what other people will think about us all
the time.
I mean,
that's,
social media is so much about what will other people think about us,
but the truth is they probably think about us as much as we think about them.
And that's not much.
And at the end of the day,
you've got to live with you.
So that to me is the,
and so I,
I enjoy Christmas knowing it's not mine.
And if people don't like that,
I feel like,
okay,
but they'll send me a mean email and then they won't think about me.
But I'll still be here.
Solid answer to a strange question.
Maybe I'll just say this.
I have always loved Hanukkah and what it celebrates the purification of,
of the temple,
which I think is really needed today.
Namely a recovery of worship.
You know,
I think people need a sacred space.
They need a temple,
a place to pray.
And uh,
what's happening in the hyper secularized world as they've lost a sense of where
do I go,
where do I go to pray?
And the temple needs to be reclaimed and purified.
So I think that's a beautiful thing for every one of the nice things about
Konica.
There's no Jewish holiday for the dedication of the temple.
There's only a Jewish holiday for the rededication of Campbell.
And when we talk about the renewal of religion,
what we're really talking about is Konica.
Hmm.
Well,
gentlemen,
it's been an absolute pleasure.
I thank you guys.
Good.
This tape,
this is a busy season for you guys.
I hope when you guys were driving here.
Well,
I hope when you were driving here and you were like,
ah,
I don't have to do that.
And you were when you woke up this morning when I got back.
Yeah,
there you go.
Well,
thank you so much.
We're going to link to,
uh,
to your books down below and all that good stuff.
Okay.
Thank you guys for watching and comment right down below.
Maybe they'll read it.
There you go.